---
title: An abstract computation step
parent: DiFlow
nav_order: 2
---

## An abstract computation step

The module concept inspired us to think of an abstract way to represent
a computation step and implement this in NextFlow. We wrote \[Portash\]
to this end. But Portash had its shortcomings. The most important of
which was that it did not adhere to separation of concerns: execution
definition (what?) where mixed up with execution context (how?/where?).
Moreover, dynamic nature of Portash lends itself well to running a tool
as a service, but not so much in a batch process.

Nevertheless, we were able to express a generic NextFlow step as pure
*configuration* that is passed to a process at runtime. This allows for
some very interesting functionality. Some prototypes were developed, the
last one of which could run a single-cell RNA pipeline from mapping to
generating an integrated dataset combining different samples.

The run-configuration was provided by means of a Portash YAML spec
residing in the module directory. It must be stressed that not requiring
the component *code* to be already available inside the container is a
big plus. It means a container contains dependencies, not the actual run
script so the latter can be updated more frequently. This is especially
useful during component and pipeline development.

Our first implementation had a few disadvantages:

-   It contained a mix of what to run and how to run it, but it did not
    contain information on the container to run in. This had to be
    configured externally, but then the module is not an independent
    entity anymore.
-   Specifying and overriding YAML content in Groovy is possible, but
    not something that is intuitive. We worked around that by letting
    the user specify custom configuration using a Groovy nested `Map`.
-   The module functionality was abstracted with a consistent API and
    the difference between 2 modules was just a few lines of code with a
    different name or pointer. But still, one had to maintain that and
    making a similar change in a growing set of module files is a recipe
    for mistakes.

But overall, the concept of an abstract computation step proved to work,
it was just that a few ingredients were still missing it seemed. On the
positive side, we showed that it's possible to have an abstract API for
(NextFlow) modules that keeps the underlying implementation hidden while
improving the readability of the pipeline code.

