---
title: Step 23 - More than one input
parent: Step by step
nav_order: 22
---

## Step 23 - More than one input

It may appear in the above example that input can only be provided as
one variable or file. NextFlow allows you to specify not only wildcards
(`*` for instance) but also arrays. This comes in handy when multiple
input file reference need to be provided on the CLI. For instance, when
doing a mapping step we usually need to provide a reference file. We
could add this reference file as a parameter (and take it up in
`nextflow.config` but then it would just be seen as a string value.
NextFlow can not know then that it has to check for existence of the
file prior to starting to run the process[^3].

How does a DiFlow module know then what file reference is related to
what option on the CLI? We would obviously not want to run
`CellRanger count` on a reference file as input and use a `fastq` file
as reference (as if that would work?!). That means we have to be sure to
somehow let the DiFlow module know what file references correspond to
what options on the CLI.

There are three possibilities:

1.  There is only one input file: in this case we just have to make sure
    it is passed as a `Path` object to the DIFlow module.

2.  There are multiple input files but they correspond to the same
    option on the CLI. For instance, `cat`'ing multiple files where
    order is not relevant. In this case, we can simply pass a
    `List[Path]` to the DiFlow module.

3.  There are multiple input files corresponding to the different
    options on the CLI, for instance CellRanger with input and a
    reference file. In this case, we pass something like

``` groovy
[ "input": "<fastq-dir>", "reference": "<reference-dir>" ]
```

While there may be still other possibilities that we may encounter in
the future, these three are covered by the current implementation of
DiFlow.

> A DiFlow module contains the necessary logic to parse three types of
> datastructures as input file references: `Path`, `List[Path]` and
> `Map[String, List[Path]]`.

**Remark:** that the easiest way to create a `Path` object with the
proper pointers in a NextFlow context is to use the built-in `file()`
function. It simply takes a `String` argument pointing to the file
(either relative or absolute).

There's some more magic going on in the background. For starters, if you
specify just either `Path` or `List[Path]`, the DiFlow module will
retrieve the appropriate command-line option to associate it with
*automagically*. This way, as a pipeline developer you usually should
not care about what exact command line option is necessary for your
input data to be processed.

